He did not miss the sign the first time but the second time it meant his life. He was Moses.
Our lives are full of signposts, figurative markers for lessons, memories, experiences.
Some good, some bad, some signposts we erect, others are put up for us.
In either case, they should help us to continue in life successfully.
For instance, consider a lesson, a signpost, in the life of Moses.
It happened shortly after the crossing of the Red Sea, and it is recorded in Exodus chapter 17
at a place called Refidem, the Ezralites gathered, and there was Moses, by a crag, with his staff,
with a quarreling nation. The events there at Refidem provided a significant lesson for Moses
as something to remember for future circumstances. And so he marked that spa. How did he do it?
He changed the name from Refidem, which meant refresh, to Meraba, which meant quarreling.
Little did Moses know that that name would ring in his ears.
Thirty-nine years later, at a place called Kadesh, Moses was again near a crag with his staff,
with a quarreling nation before him. And based on the events that happened there,
look at what is recorded in Numbers chapter 20 verses 12 and 13.
Numbers chapter 20 verses 12 and 13, we read,
Jehovah later said to Moses and Aaron,
because you did not show faith in me and sanctify me before the eyes of the people of Israel,
you will not bring this congregation into the land that I will give them.
These are the waters of Meraba, with the Israelites quarreled with Jehovah, so that he was sanctified
among them. Moses is taught a lesson here. It's unclear who exactly named the place Meraba,
but Moses did record it, that these were the waters of Meraba, an unforgettable signpost in Moses'
life. What it meant to Moses was very clear. So what now? What would Moses do following this?
Well, from verse 14, if we were to read, we would see that Moses carried on with his assignment,
he continued to lead the Israelites. He led them against the kings of Sihon and Og,
he began to see Jehovah's mighty arm of power as they draw closer and closer to the Promised Land,
and in his enthusiasm, Moses makes one request of Jehovah. He turns to him and we can read his words
in Deuteronomy chapter 3 verses 25 and 26. Moses' words in verse 25, he writes,
Please, let me pass over and see the good land that is across the Jordan, this good mountainous
region, and Lebanon. But Jehovah was still furious with me because of you, and he would not listen
to me. Rather, Jehovah said to me, enough from you, never speak to me again about this matter.
Jehovah was still furious with me because of you, Meraba. That's what Moses is referring to.
The signpost was clear from Moses. How would Moses respond to this? What would he do?
Well, Moses carried on. He got back to work, back to business. He wasn't finished. He continued
to lead and shepherd the nation. He prepared Joshua to be his successor, and he worked along until
Jehovah came to Moses and said to him, Moses, it's time to go to the mountain. In other words, it was
time for Moses' death. Read, please, Jehovah's words to Moses in Deuteronomy chapter 32 verses 51 and 52.
Beginning in verse 51 of Deuteronomy 32, we read Jehovah's words, because both of you,
that is, Moses and Aaron, were unfaithful to me, among the Israelites, at the waters of Meraba,
of Kadesh, in the wilderness of Zinn, because you did not sanctify me before the people of Israel.
You will see the land from a distance, but you will not enter the land that I am giving to the
people of Israel. Jehovah draws Moses' attention back to Meraba. What effect did this have on Moses,
that Jehovah referred to Meraba again? Well, think of this. After Jehovah's refusal to reconsider
his judgment on Moses, Moses continued fully dedicated to his assignment. In fact, the details
make up the book of Deuteronomy. If you look at what happened shortly before Jehovah's words here
in chapter 32, we find Moses recited a beautiful song of praise to Jehovah. Following Jehovah's words
in chapter 33, we find Moses here giving a blessing for the nation of Israel. Do you see what happened
to Moses? Moses marked the lessons and experiences in his life, like Meraba. He was not paralyzed or
broken by disappointment. Rather, his resolve to serve Jehovah faithfully was strengthened.
What helped Moses? How did he do it? Consider at least two things that may have helped Moses.
Number one, Moses' intimate friendship with Jehovah. For example, why would Moses even
ask Jehovah to reconsider his judgment on him? Because Moses knew Jehovah intimately. He knew
him to be a God merciful and compassionate and abundant in loving kindness. And when Jehovah
refused to reconsider, Moses did not say a word. Why? Because Moses knew that Jehovah was also a God
perfect in his activity and that all his ways are justice. You see, for Moses' example, we see the more
intimate our friendship is with Jehovah, the more intimately he can teach us and train us.
And thus, like Moses, it will be easier to get past disappointment and continue in our assignment
faithful and joyful. Consider a second thing that may have helped Moses. And that was Job.
Remember, Moses wrote the book of Job around 1473, around the same time as the events that
took place at Maraba of K-dash. The words are fresh in his mind.
Moses knew how Jehovah dealt with Job. For example, at Job 38, verse 3, Jehovah said to Job,
brace yourself, please, like a man, and I will question you. Moses knew how Job responded
to his problems and to Jehovah's correction. For example, at Job 40, verse 4, Job said to Jehovah,
I put my hand over my mouth. And Moses also knew the final outcome of the matters with Job.
Therefore, Moses was able to see his own difficulties and his own disappointments through the
prism of universal sovereignty. And that gave Moses perspective. So, take advantage of the
inspired words of God at your disposal. Meditate deeply on the experiences of Jehovah's faithful
servants like Job and like Moses. These examples will give you perspective and allow you to move on
joyfully. Brothers and sisters, the simple truth is, in our life of service to God,
we may be treated unfairly. We will likely be disappointed at times. Our expectations may not be met
and we will respond poorly at times. Mark the moment as a lesson in life, a Maraba.
And if, as was the case with Moses, Jehovah marks it for you? Be grateful. Do not be paralyzed or
broken by disappointment. Like Moses, fix in mind what you have to do. Allow the experience or
the lesson to strengthen your resolve to serve Jehovah faithfully and joyfully. You can, if you mark
your Maraba.